Doc.no.: Dxxxx<br>
Date: 2018-09-17<br>
Reply-to: Titus Winters, Ashley Hedberg, Eric Fiselier<br>
Audience: LEWG

# Extension by inspecting members of User Defined Types?

In [P0921](http://wg21.link/P0921) and [SD-8][1], we enumerate a list of changes
that the standard library generally considers "in bounds" when making changes
between two language versions.  However, in [P0919](http://wg21.link/P0919r2) we
are extending the functionality of the standard library in a way that it outside
of those bounds: examining how we interpret user-provided types (in this case,
hashers) by inspecting them for certain members.

Specifically, P0919 takes user-provided hashers and looks for a member tag type
`transparent_key_equal` - in the presence of such a type, additional constraints
are placed on the `Eq` template parameter to `std::unordered_map` (and similar
unordered associative containers). Additionally, we may start calling
`operator()(T)` for `T` that doesnâ€™t match the original key - this is the goal
in enabling heterogeneous lookup. In theory, there could be existing user
provided hashers that define these things but assign different semantics - for
those users, this will be a breaking change.

Anecdotally, nobody cares, nor does anyone believe this is likely. However, it
does bring up a question: Do we wish to extend SD8 as we identify more cases
like this? Or should we attempt to keep that list fixed and design extensions /
future modifications in terms of those operations?  We could imagine instead
performing this extension by introducing a new name in `std`, perhaps
`std::transparent_hash<Container, HeterogenousType>` and encouraging
user-specialization of that template to opt-in to heterogenous lookup for a
particular (container/key/value/eq/hash, heterogenous type) mapping. Whenever we
want to offer customization points like this, we'd want to ensure that there is
no way two users would want to define it for the same type. The coroutines
customization points are potentially problematic here, as two users may want a
coroutine containing no user-defined types.

We do not propose modifying P0919, but we do propose that we discuss our policy
and behavior going forward. If we believe that this type of extension is safe,
we should amend SD8 accordingly - although describing the conditions under which
we would make such a change to how we interpret user-defined types may be
difficult.  

On the other hand, if we believe this type of extension should be avoided, we
should be clear about that and commit to finding extension mechanisms that are
more in keeping with the behavior described in SD-8.

[1]: https://isocpp.org/std/standing-documents/sd-8-standard-library-compatibility
